---
title: "The Sea Wall (Un barrage contre le Pacifique) "
date: 2022-04-21T17:16:58.984Z
caption: ""
director: Rithy Panh
released: France, Cambodia, Belgium, 2008
imdb: https://www.imdb.com/title/tt0931285/?ref_=fn_al_tt_3
layout: film
---
Based on Maguerite Duras’ semi-autobiographical novel *Un barrage contre le Pacifique* (1950) and directed by the Cambodian filmmaker Rithy Panh, *The Sea Wall* is an unusual 'imperialist nostalgia' film (Rosaldo, 1989). First, such as *Out of Africa* (Sydney Pollack, 1985),  *Indochine* (Regis Wargnier, 1992),  'Raj Revival' films (Rushdie, 1992), such as *Heat and Dust* (James Ivory, 1983).  It depicts a French widow (Isabelle Huppert) in 1930s French Indochina, who tries to eke out a living for herself and her adolescent son and daughter on a concession she purchased from the ruling French colonialists. Her rice paddies are regularly flooded by the encroaching sea that spoils the crops and results in the family’s poverty.  In contrast to other imperialist nostalgia films, *The Seawall* does not indulge the spectator in the glamour and opulence of the colonial past but centres on those disenfranchised under French colonial rule. Class, more so than ethnicity, determines social inclusion and exclusion. The French widow is shunned and exploited by her wealthy and powerful compatriots but creates mutual bonds of solidarity with the Indochinese locals. Like in *The Lover* (Jean-Jacques Annaud) also based on an autobiographical novel by Duras and set in French Indochina, the colonial power hierarchies between the French and the Indochinese are inverted, as the impoverished mothers encourage their daughters to maintain morally dubious liaisons with prosperous Chinese businessmen, in the misguided hope that these relationships might resolve the families’ precarity.